**How can the study of laboratory organisms inform us about cancer in humans?**

# **Introduction**

As the human lifespan continues to grow, cancer has increasingly become one of the most common causes of death in developed countries. To stem the tide, research into cancer has also become a top priority for many governments. Laboratory organisms have become a cornerstone of cancer research, providing numerous valuable insights into both basic and translational cancer research over the past few decades. In particular, laboratory organisms have provided insight into the genetic and biochemical basis of different cancer hallmarks. In addition, laboratory models can support the development of new cancer therapeutics and biomarker discovery.  At the same time, there are important caveats to using laboratory organisms as models of human cancer that must be kept in mind to correctly interpret the results from experiments on these organisms.  

# **Why use laboratory organisms to study cancer?**

We need to understand how cancer progresses in humans so that therapeutics can be developed that target the mechanisms behind cancer development. Laboratory organisms are used as models of the molecular and physiological processes that occur during cancer. The reason models are used is that it is comparatively difficult to study the process of cancer in humans. Firstly, we cannot monitor the progress of a cancer in a human over time from initial lesion to malignancy, as human patients only present to the clinic when there are symptoms, by which time a tumour has probably already established. This obscurs many of the underlying molecular processes that drive the tumorigenesis. Secondly, cancer often develops over a long time, and frequently only manifests in older humans, so monitoring could not practically be done within the lifespan of the researcher. In addition, it is difficult (and certainly unethical) to experimentally manipulate humans in a way that “less intelligent” species like yeast might be in the lab (e.g. screening, genetic engineering, breeding). Also, we cannot control for every variable in a human individual, whereas with laboratory organisms, experimental conditions can be carefully controlled to ensure the validity and reproducibility of any results obtained. Laboratory organisms generally face none of these concerns, and so have become useful tools for studying cancer research in lieu of humans. 

Of course, not every species is chosen for cancer research. Although the common laboratory species each have their own merits and flaws, they are generally chosen for a few shared reasons. Firstly, they may possess orthologous genes, signalling pathways and physiological processes as humans. For example, mutations in the _MSH2_ gene is often the driver of hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, and this gene is known to be widely conserved from _E. coli_ to mice. Despite some degree of homology, laboratory organisms are not always representative of cancer in humans, as will be discussed later on. Secondly, they may be genetically tractable, with well-annotated genomes and a variety of editing toolboxes. Thirdly, they can be screened in a medium to high-throughput manner, allowing for the testing of many experimental conditions and replicability. 

# **Insights gained from laboratory organisms**

## The origins of cancer

One question that has remained uncertain in the study of cancer is what the cell-of-origin (CoO) of cancer is. In the cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis, only a subset of cells within a cancer are capable of initiating and maintaining the cancer. These cells are thought to have stem cell-like properties, including self-renewal and proliferation. Mouse models have frequently been used to test the validity of the cancer stem cell hypothesis, with mixed results. In one study by Lapidot et al (1994), cells were purified from human leukaemia via fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACs) for a stem cell surface phenotype, i.e. cells that expressed CD34 and CD38. When these cells were injected in immunodeficient mice, it reinitiated leukaemia in the mice. As the frequency of these cells was &lt;1 in 250 000 cells, this implied the cancer originated from a small subset of cells that retain stem cell-like properties. On the other hand, when Kelly et al (2007) injected just 10 random, unsorted cells from mice lymphomas into normal mice, which resulted in tumour development. If cancer indeed arises from a rare subset of cancer stem cells, then it is very unlikely that it would be picked up in a 10-cell sample. Although these results seem difficult to reconcile, it appears that the differences could be due to several differences in experimental conditions. For example, Lapidot et al used patient-derived xenografts, while Kelly et al used transgenic mouse models. In addition, the two studies examined different cancers, so it could be that the CSC hypothesis applies to some cancers but not others. Thirdly, the way in which each study isolated the tumour cells before transfer into the mice could have been selected for cells that are not representative of their endogenous tumour environment. What the study of the CSC hypothesis in mice shows is that experiments in model organisms must be carefully controlled in order for their outcomes to be comparable. 

## Investigating the functions of genes linked to intrinsic cancer hallmarks

Early studies of cancer made use of _in vitro_ systems and simpler model organisms. That being said, these model organisms have offered a plethora of insights into the basic molecular processes that drive various cancer hallmarks. (briefly describe some examples, and use _Drosophila_ as a case study?) 

One of the intrinsic hallmarks of cancer is growth signal autonomy: cancer cells exhibit unregulated proliferation in the absence of external growth signals. This proliferation is driven by mutations that prevent exit from the cell cycle and promote S phase entry. Both budding yeast and fission yeast have been used extensively to study cell cycle control in eukaryotes, which has been conserved throughout evolution. For example, Paul Nurse’s studies of fission yeast discovered that the _CDC2_ gene was required for the G1 to S phase transition. Studying the cell cycle in fission yeast is easier than in human cells, as fission yeast cell cycle progression can be easily monitored via its morphology, and yeast cells replicate more quickly, allowing for higher throughput. These characteristics allowed Nurse to perform high throughput genetic screens of temperature-sensitive mutants that exhibited cell cycle abnormalities. Later work by the Nurse group identified a human  homolog (CDK1) of _CDC2_ that could rescue a fission yeast mutated for _cdc2_. Such research demonstrated that cell cycle control is highly conserved between yeast and humans, and laid the foundation for the discovery of other CDKs in humans, such as CDK2, which is a frequent target of proto-oncogenes. The insight that CDK activity is needed for cell proliferation would identify them as potent targets for anticancer therapies, including Cdk inhibitors like palbociclib and ribociclib. Apart from CDKs, yeast have also been used to study other signalling pathways involved in cell proliferation, such as the Target of Rapamycin (TOR) pathway, which integrates various signals to promote growth and proliferation. Hence, yeast have been uniquely able to provide insight into the basic molecular mechanisms that drive cancer cell proliferation due to their tractability to screening and monitoring of cell cycle progression. 

Apart from basic research into mechanisms that affect the cell itself, laboratory organisms have also been used to research how cell-cell interactions in a tissue affect cancer development. Although yeast share many homologous genes with humans, their unicellularity means that it is difficult to study how proliferation is regulated by juxtacrine inhibitory signals. As such, multicellular organisms such as _Drosophila_ have also been employed. Studies in _Drosophila_ have been instrumental in elucidating the Salvador-Warts-Hippo pathway, a tumour suppressor pathway that mediates contact inhibition in _Drosophila_ imaginal discs. Like yeast, _Drosophila _are genetically tractable organisms, and this was due to the development of  transposon-based mutagenesis systems techniques to _Drosophila_. _Drosophila_ also happened to be the model organism for studying body plan regulation, and this led to the use of _Drosophila_ as a model for analogous cell-cell interactions in cancer. For example, Justice et al (1995) reported the discovery of the tumour suppressor gene Warts in _Drosophila_, the loss of which caused excessive proliferation and irregular morphology in _Drosophila_ imaginal disc cells. The researchers used a P-element mutagenesis screen to identify Warts as the gene responsible, and based on its sequence, identified it as a protein kinase. Later work by Huang et al (2005) showed that Warts targets the _Drosophila _gene _yorkie_ for phosphorylation, first by demonstrating that Warts and _yorkie_ co-immunoprecipitate, and that overexpression of _yorkie_ in flies mimics the Warts mutant phenotype. Homologues of both Warts and _yorkie_ have been identified in humans and shown to have altered gene expression in cancer. Hence, by elucidating a signalling pathway in a more tractable organism, we can understand how dysregulation of the orthologous pathway in humans leads to cancer. 

## Understand development of extrinsic cancer hallmarks

Extrinsic hallmarks of cancer refer to processes in cancer development that occur in the tumour microenvironment and can involve non-malignant cells that are recruited by the tumour, such as cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and immune cells. This includes angiogenesis, immune evasion, and metastasis. Cell extrinsic hallmarks tend to be more difficult to model _in vitro_ compared to cell intrinsic processes because of their three-dimensional nature and how they rely on a diversity of cells to progress. As such, the use of organisms as experimental systems can partially overcome this problem by providing a living testbed with sets of physiological systems of varying complexity. 

Mice are probably the most popular model system for investigating these hallmarks, as they share much of their physiology with humans, most importantly their circulatory and immune systems. In particular, autochthonous mice models are considered to be the most representative of human cancers. These are mice that have developed a tumour _in situ_ from normal cells within the mice, which is in contrast to xenografts in which exogenous tumour cells are implanted. The main reasons they are considered more representative is because the tumour is orthotopic, and they are not immunocompromised. In xenografts, immunocompromised mice (e.g. NOD-SCID) have to be used to avoid rejection of the human tumour cells. However, this prevents the study of the immune system's role in cancer development. Autochthonous mice can be created in two ways: one way is to genetically engineer the mice to overexpress an oncogene or knock out a tumour suppressor gene. The other way is to induce random mutations with carcinogens. While the former provides certainty on the initial cancer-causing hit, the latter may be more realistic in that the tumour occurs spontaneously. 

One example of genetically modified mice being used to study the tumour microenvironment is in a mouse model of squamous skin cancer. Erez et al (2010) used K14-HPV16 transgenic mice, which are mice that have been engineered with the oncogenic HPV16 early region to be under the control of human keratin-14 promoter/enhancer. They performed microarray analysis of gene expression in CAFs, and found that proinflammatory genes were upregulated. They then injected a HPV16-derived skin carcinoma cell line, along with CAFs, into a mouse that lacked cancer. It was found that the tumours injected with CAFs exhibited increased angiogenesis, which may be partially due to recruitment of macrophages. The study thus implicated CAFs as important actors in cancer development and identified possible pathways for targeting by therapeutics: the proinflammatory genes in the CAFs, and signalling pathways to macrophages. This interaction between fibroblasts and the immune system could only have been discovered in an organism possessing both these cell types, thus exemplifying the unique advantage of mouse models over other common model organisms. 

While mouse models are also commonly used to study metastasis, surprisingly _Drosophila_ is also frequently used as a model of metastasis. Pagliarini and Xu (2003) first demonstrated the ability of  _Drosophila_ cells to metastasise by using the Flp/FRT system (similar to Cre/Lox) to introduce a Ras<sup>V12</sup> mutation and inactivating genes affecting cell polarity. In this system, only the cells with FRT sites will be mutated. As they are juxtaposed with wild type cells, it is representative of heterogeneous tumour microenvironments that consist of both cancer and normal cells. Later works went on to identify other genes important to metastasis in _Drosophila_, such as those in the Notch signalling pathway or cytoskeleton regulators. These genes were mostly homologous to the ones implicated in human metastasis as well. The use of _Drosophila_ as a model for metastases may be particularly valuable when screening for anti-metastatic, which are notoriously difficult to develop, as flies can be screened in a high throughput manner. 

## Effects of therapeutics

Laboratory organisms can be used to determine the effect of therapeutics on various cancer types. Before drugs can be tested in humans, there is usually a requirement that efficacy is first observed in laboratory organisms first. As clinical development of drugs is expensive, it is more cost-effective for candidate therapeutics to be screened in a high-throughput manner _in vitro_ or in yeast before being screened on small, short-lived species (e.g. _Drosophila_, zebrafish), and finally on mice, which are often considered to be the most representative model of human physiology that is commonly used in the lab. In addition, there are generally less ethical qualms about testing the safety of experimental therapeutics on a laboratory organism before on a human. This would allow experimenters to adjust the dosage of the therapeutic to a safe level for patients. 

Mice have been frequent test subjects in preclinical trials. For example, RIP-Tag2 mice models of pancreatic islet cell cancer have been used to test angiogenesis inhibitors. When the inhibitors failed, experimenters were able to investigate the reason for the failure. For example, in one trial of function-blocking antibodies of VEGF receptors R1 and 2 in RIP-Tag2 mice, the tumours exhibited resistance to VEGFR2 inhibitors. RT-qPCR of the resistant tumours found that FGFs, Ephrins, and Angiopoietins were upregulated in the resistant tumours, which induced angiogenesis independent of VEGF. Such information from mice models helps us to understand how tumours respond to therapeutics, thereby allowing for improvements to therapeutics design. Some of these mice models have further been found to be highly accurate to clinical experience. One mice model of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) developed by Zuber et al (2009) responded to cytarabine/doxorubicin therapy, the standard-of-care for AML patients, in a way that mirrored real clinical outcomes. This implies that some mice models have good predictive power which can increase the success rate of therapeutics that do reach the clinical stage. 

Personalised cancer models have even been developed to understand how an individual patient’s cancer could respond to treatment. For example, patient-derived xenograft mice are created from resect human tumours that are injected into genetically immunocompromised mice. _Drosophila_ have also been developed into cancer avatars, where they are engineered with mutations found in an individual patient’s tumour. These personalised cancer models could then be screened with different drugs to identify those that would be most effective in the patient. As cancers are highly heterogeneous from patient to patient, the hope is that these cancer models would be more predictive of the patient’s response to therapeutics. Although these model systems have yet to actually be employed in regular clinical practice, they could represent a step towards personalised medicine. 

# Limitations of using laboratory organisms 

While studies of cancer in laboratory organisms has led to many breakthroughs in our understanding of the disease, they have suffered from a number of criticisms. The most important one may be that the cancer models are not sufficiently representative of human cancer. Invertebrates, for example, have short life spans, and so do not naturally develop cancer from a spontaneous mutation in the same way as humans. As such, it is arguable whether experimentally induced tumours are faithful replicas of human cancers. And although mice seem physiologically similar to humans, there are differences in stromal signalling, tumour suppressor pathways, and in anatomies that limit their ability to mimic human cancer completely. For example, Ras is inhibited by two loci, p14<sup>ARF</sup> and p16<sup>INK4A</sup>, which are in the same loci in both humans and mice. In small proportions of human or mouse cancers, one of these ORFs gets corrupted but not the other. In mouse cancers, the p14<sup>ARF</sup>/p53 pathway is lost more often, so this is more important for tumour suppression. In human cancers, p16<sup>INK4A</sup> is lost more often. The reasons for this difference, and the implications for cancer, are still unclear. If cancer models are indeed not representative of human cancers, then this is indeed a big problem for the field. In fact, it has already created problems for therapeutics testing. Many therapeutics appear effective in preclinical models, yet fail to work in clinical trials. For example, theralizumab, an antibody against the T-cell co-activator CD28, was developed as a therapeutic against B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Despite showing efficacy in mice, rats, and macaques, it failed to work in human patients. However, given the difficulties of studying cancer in humans, this may be an uneasy tradeoff that the field has to accept. 

# Conclusion

Overall, laboratory organisms have proven to be indispensable to the study of cancer. They have made its study more convenient, high throughput, accessible, and more ethical. Most would agree that the benefits to people greatly outweigh the costs of using them so long as animal models are treated humanely. With the range of laboratory organisms available, the choice of model system may depend on the particular experimental question. Simpler species such as yeast and invertebrates may be more suitable for highly conserved, basic molecular processes, while mice are more relevant for studying systemic processes. It is also worth noting that the use of these laboratory organisms would not be possible without great advancements made in the fields of genetic engineering and deep sequencing, which have made it easier to induce oncogenic hits and then recover the genotypes of cancer cells in these models. In addition, there are many non-human species that are not employed in the laboratory, and yet have been helpful to cancer studies. These include Tasmanian devils, for their uniquely transmissible form of cancer, and elephants, blue whales, and naked mole rats, for their unusual resistance to cancer. In the future, we may see more sophisticated _in vitro _systems such as organoids and organ-on-a-chip displace the use of laboratory organisms in some instances. However, it is clear laboratory organisms are here to stay. 




# Discarded
* Useful, has advantages 
* But not always the most representative – range of representativeness. This caveat has to be kept in mind especially when it comes to testing therapeutics 
    * E.g. TGN1412 (Theralizumab) is an antibody raised against CD28, a T-cell co-activator, to stimulate T-cell killing of leukaemia cells (B-CLL). Tested in mice, rats, macaques. But it didn't work in humans. 
* Variety of techniques – deep sequencing, synthetic biology, single cell sequencing 
* Also can’t ignore in vitro methods, tissue culture methods, organoids, organ-on-a-chip, that have also made useful contributions to oncology. Also in silico methods? 
* Ethical issues with the use of animals for testing 
* Other animals outside the laboratory have also proved useful case studies: tasmanian devils, for their uniquely transmissible form of cancer, and elephants, blue whales, and naked mole rats, species that are unusually resistant to cancer. 

These are certainly the more common species used but several unusual species such as macaques, dogs, and tree shrew have all been employed in research. 

Ultimately we cannot be without lab organisms. They have made the study of cancer more convenient, high throughput, accessible, and more ethical, and the benefits to people greatly outweigh the cost of using the animals so long as they are treated humanely. 

Lab organisms are basically fundamental to cancer research. 

Use of lab organisms bolstered by tech advancemetns e.g. UAS-RNAi libraries for fly research  → genetic tractability 

I guess u could argue a lot of basic research in like E. coli or yeast e.g. translation, transcription, DNA replication? Contributed to cancer research eventually? 

Screenable organisms necessary for a genetic approach to studying cancer → organism of choice depends on experimental approach 

research by the Hartwell lab used genetic screens to discover _CDC28_, which controls the Start point of the cell cycle. Independently,  howed that budding yeast were useful for studying the cell cycle as its progression through the cell cycle could be inferred from its morphology alone (i.e. the size of the bud), and its cell cycle could be synchronised using a mating pheromone. This made it easy to study how different mutations affected cell cycle progression. Through genetic screens,

One popular way laboratory organisms have been used to learn about cancer is via genetic screens for genes that cause cancer-like phenotypes. When there is a lack of _a priori _knowledge of the genes that cause a particular cancer hallmark, which was usually the case in early cancer studies, forward genetic screens were often employed. The basic principle is that mutations are randomly introduced into a library of organisms, identify those with cancer-like phenotypes, then find the location of the mutation, thus identifying genes linked to cancer. 



* E. coli
    * Molecular processes
* Budding yeast and fission yeast 
    * Cell cycle 
    * DNA replication and licensing 
    * Discovery of new oncogenes and tumour suppressors ? 
* Drosophila 
    * Discover mutation e.g. Igl 
    * “Identification of the part played by cell polarity deficiencies (Brumby and Richardson, 2003; Grifoni et al., 2004; Igaki et al., 2006), oncogenic cell signalling (Read et al., 2004), the role of neural stem cells and asymmetric cell division in brain tumours (Caussinus and Gonzalez, 2005), the non-cell-autonomous tissue overgrowth driven by dysfunction in endocytic components (Moberg et al., 2005; Vaccari and Bilder, 2005) and tumour growth regulation by epigenetic silencing” 
* C. elegans 
    * Role of miRNAs 

Identifying driver and passenger mutations, and functions of driver mutations 

The species used for testing range across the tree of life: from single celled yeast, to invertebrates like _Drosophila_ and _Caenorhabditis elegans_, and to vertebrates including zebrafish, rats and mice. The knowledge gained from laboratory organisms may be even more vast: experiments on laboratory organisms have uncovered insights into virtually every hallmark of cancer, as well as the efficacy of various cancer therapeutics, allowing for prediction of which therapeutics are best for testing in humans. 

**Limitations of laboratory organisms as cancer models  **



* Differences in physiology, lifespan, environmental factors, etc. 
* Analyse these criticisms – how valid are they? How have these issues been addressed? 
* Ideally, a model system would be one that perfectly recapitulates cancer development in humans. This includes sporadic initiation in an authentic cell of origin, progressive accumulation of mutations in pathways that are orthologous to humans, and similar responses to cancer therapies as human cancers. 
    * Have these been addressed in model systems? I think drosophila, mice are good examples of how they have tried to iterate 

**Future of cancer research using laboratory organisms **



* How to improve the representativeness of laboratory organisms as models of cancer 
    * GEMMS, autochthonous models – synthetic biology 
    * Personalised cancer models
* Using more representative, ethical models → decreased use of laboratory organisms? E.g. organoids, in silico methods, better in vitro methods using human tissue culture 