**There are still no effective preventions or treatments for metastasis of most solid tumour cancers.  Discuss why it is so challenging to develop these.**

# **Introduction**

Metastasis is currently the main cause of cancer-related death. In fact, survival rates are very low for patients with metastasis, with only 5-30% estimated to be surviving after 5 years from the point of diagnosis. Despite the lethality of metastatic cancers, there are currently no effective ways to address it. Ideally, cancer therapy should aim to prevent metastasis entirely. However, for most patients, metastasis would have already occurred by the time of diagnosis, as it can begin early and be distinct from tumour initiation. At that point, preventing metastases is not enough, so ways to eliminate existing metastases also have to be developed to minimise its impact on patients. A number of challenges have prevented the development of effective therapeutic approaches for metastatic cancers, including resistance of metastatic tumours to therapies, heterogeneity in metastases, as well as the difficulty of testing new drugs. 

# **1. Metastasis is a heterogeneous in terms of gene expression and microenvironment, making it difficult to develop general therapeutic strategies**

Metastasis develops differently in every patient and in every tumour. This can make it difficult to design general therapeutic strategies that can target a wide range of patients, and would thus be more cost effective to develop as there is a larger market. 

One way that metastases are heterogenous is in patterns of gene expression. This makes it difficult to design therapeutics that target particular gene products, as a therapeutic that is effective for a small subset of metastases may not be effective on another subset. Although single cell profiling is helping to capture the full heterogeneity of tumours, there is a lack of complete understanding of which adaptive programmes are shared across metastatic tumours. For example, the epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) pathway has been shown to be important in the development of some metastases but not others. Hennessy et al (2009) performed a microarray analysis of 28 human metastatic breast cancers, and found that these breast cancers had a higher expression of genes involved in EMT compared to common breast cancers. This suggested that EMT was involved in metastasis. In contrast, Fischer et al (2015) showed, using lineage tracing of a primary tumour, that most cells within a metastatic lung tumour in a mouse model did not exhibit EMT, and maintained an epithelial phenotype. Moreover, when they inhibited EMT by overexpressing the miRNA miR-200, lung metastasis development was unaffected. These contrasting outcomes suggest that cancer cells become metastatic via different pathways. In this case, if a drug were developed that targeted the EMT pathway, it may not be effective for many patients whose metastases did not undergo EMT in the first place. Even within cancers of the same type, such as adrenocortical carcinoma, most mutated genes can be distinct between patients. This thus presents a challenge to designing drugs with wide applicability. 

**Also Tirosh et al (2016) – used single cell sequencing to genetically profile cells within metastatic melanomas. They found intratumour transcriptional heterogeneity.**

Apart from heterogeneity in gene expression, metastases are also heterogeneous in terms of their microenvironment. The microenvironment of a secondary tumour is important to its survival – suppression of immune cells, angiogenesis, and changes to adipocytes help to create a protumorigenic environment. However, these processes of microenvironment modification may be of varying importance to particular metastases depending on the pre-existing environment of the secondary site. As tumour cells disseminate to different organs in the body, the type of “soil” that these “seeds” land in can modulate the effectiveness of therapeutics that target these microenvironment processes.  For instance, angiogenesis inhibitors were proposed as a way to prevent metastases from growing, as the generation of new blood vessels is required for tumours to be nourished sufficiently to grow beyond 1 mm in diameter. However, trials of antiangiogenesis therapies turned out to be unsuccessful. In clinical trials, VEGF inhibitors were found to be ineffective in treating metastases, and in one mouse model the VEGF inhibitor sunitinib was even found to accelerate metastasis. This could be because antiangiogenic therapies are in practice used to target tumours that are already unresponsive to conventional therapies, which are tumours that already have a well-established blood supply and their survival is not dependent on angiogenesis. Furthermore, metastasis can occur in organs that already have an abundant supply of blood (e.g. brain), using existing blood vessels, so angiogenesis is not important to their survival. From this case, it can be seen that drugs that target microenvironment processes are only effective if the precancerous niche is not already prepared for secondary tumour development. As such, it is difficult to design drugs that target microenvironment processes if their importance is not generalisable to all metastases. 

# **2. Metastases are resistant to therapeutic strategies **

Stage IV cancer is largely considered to be incurable. Apart from the lack of metastatic drugs available for treatment, metastases are also inherently resistant to various drug-based therapies. One reason for this high level of drug resistance is that metastatic tumours are genetically unstable, more unstable than primary tumours. In one study, Gara et al (2018) performed whole exome sequencing of metastatic adrenocortical cancer samples and found that the mutation rate was about 3 times higher than in the corresponding primary tumour. This increased rate of mutation allows the metastatic cell population to rapidly evolve in response to therapeutics.

Apart from their rapid rate of genotypic change, metastatic cells also exhibit high levels of phenotypic plasticity, allowing them to reprogramme gene expression to become more drug resistant. Lineage tracing and single transcriptomic profiling in mouse lung adenocarcinoma models have found that primary tumour subclones with high plasticity tend to be enriched in their metastases, providing evidence for the high plasticity of metastatic tumours. Cancer cells that exhibit high plasticity are generally more resistant to therapeutics. In one mechanism of drug resistance, cancer cells may proliferate more slowly, reducing their sensitivity to therapeutics that often target fast proliferating cells. This has been observed in non-small cell lung cancer, colon cancer, and melanomas. Alternatively, cancer cells may temporarily suppress oncogenic pathways, then upregulating them once the drug treatment has been stopped. Metastatic tumours could exhibit an enhanced ability to undergo such phenotypic changes, thus allowing them to resist conventional cancer therapies.

Another reason for their resistance to therapy is that existing treatments for metastases often have a low therapeutic index. Metastases often involve the c-option of developmental signalling pathways, such as Wnt, Notch, Hedgehog, etc., but targeting these pathways often leads to toxic effects for non-tumour cells. For example, the JAG1-NOTCH interaction is known to drive metastasis in bone and brain tissue. Therapies that target the Notch pathway have been clinically trialled, such as γ-secretase inhibitors and monoclonal antibodies. However, γ-secretase inhibitors were found to have broad gastrointestinal toxicity, while the anti-NOTCH2/3 antibody tarextumab led to even worse survival outcomes compared to the control group. Another example comes from the TGFβ pathway, which activates various signalling molecules in various metastases (e.g. IL-11 in liver metastasis), as well as induces the mesenchymal state. However, as the TGFβ pathway is involved in both tumour promotion and tumour suppression, targeting of the incorrect pathway component can lead to tumour development, most commonly keratoacanthomas. 

Metastases can also be resistant to therapy simply because they are difficult to detect in the early stages of their development. There is increasing evidence that metastasis can occur early during cancer development and could be separate from tumour initiation. However, when the disseminating tumour cells reach the secondary site, they are able to enter dormancy such that they are undetectable by clinical imaging or screening.  To treat micrometastasis, clinicians have to be able to diagnose patients with micrometastasis. Unfortunately, current liquid biopsy assays have poor sensitivity, and further improvements in tissue-based protein/RNA assays will be needed to detect these dormant cells, perhaps using the same technology used for single cell analysis. 

**there is also the issue that some Mets are found in difficult to treat locations, e.g. brain and bone, as these locations are hard to target**

# **3. Treatments for metastatic tumours are difficult to test**

Although a variety of lab assays and experimental models have been developed to study metastasis, they have not been entirely satisfactory as none are able to fully recapitulate the process of metastasis. Many anti-cancer therapies that showed promising results in preclinical trials ended up failing in the clinic, such as matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors. Metastasis is a complex, multi-staged process that occurs in three dimensions across different cellular environments, involving interactions with many other non-tumour cell types. As such, _in vitro_ models that focus on the study of particular steps of metastases are necessarily unable to provide representative information on how the drug would perform in a patient. For example, filter assays may allow for the study of how metastatic cells invade the surrounding endothelial tissue, but it would not model subsequent steps of metastasis or other challenges faced by metastatic cells, such as shear stresses in the circulatory system. 

Mice models have also been developed to more accurately capture the metastatic process in a whole organism. However, humanised mouse models with engrafted human tumours are often immunodeficient anyway to prevent rejection of the xenograft. Although the genomic composition of the xenograft is more representative, suppression of the immune system prevents the study of the immune system's role in metastasis. Attempts to add a functional human immune system by engrafting human hematopoietic or lymphoid cells were not successful as the mice exhibited incomplete immune responses. As such, even mice models cannot fully recapitulate the metastatic process in patients, so any antimetastatic drug tested in mice would not be able to capture how the drug interacts with immune recruitment by the secondary tumour, for example. Recently, genetically engineered mice models have been developed that are immunocompetent, but it remains to be seen whether they can act as accurate metastasis models. 

Clearly, then, the most representative model of metastasis should be the human patient. Unfortunately, clinical trials for metastasis are very difficult to implement, primarily because of the way modern clinical trials are approved. Typically, a patient has to be treated with standard, previously approved drugs first before they can be treated with an experimental drug, to manage the risk to the patient. However, many patients’ cancers have already undergone metastasis at the point of diagnosis, so giving treatments only after standard of care regimens will be ineffective. For example, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitors were shown to be effective in mice models of metastasis, but failed to reduce metastasis in patients. This could have been because MMPs act in the initial stages of metastasis when the tumour first invades the extracellular matrix, while the inhibitors were given to patients with already well-established secondary tumours. As such, to maximise their effectiveness (and thus prove their efficacy in clinical trials), anti-metastatic drugs should be approved for use as soon as possible, possibly right after diagnosis. However, this assumes that the drugs will be effective and not cause more severe side effects to the patient. This ethical conundrum may be why there is reluctance to approve clinical trials, but this would certainly slow the development of new drugs. 

# **Conclusion** 

The development of drugs to prevent and treat metastases indeed faces many barriers at all parts of the pipeline, from identifying possible drug targets that would not be resisted by the tumour, to finding those with wide applicability, and finally to actually testing them for their efficacy. There is also the valid question of whether it is worth allocating resources to treating late-stage cancers, when there is greater benefit to finding ways to diagnose and prevent cancer progression at an early stage. But as more recent research has shown, metastasis could in fact play an early part of cancer progression as well, and early intervention is needed to prevent worse patient outcomes later on. More opportunities in metastasis research is likely to arise in the future, especially with the development of new technologies. These include single cell and spatial technologies, genetically engineered mouse models, organs-on-a-chip, and even artificial intelligence models. Research into metastasis therapies may simply be in its early days, and there is hope that the development of anti-metastatic drugs will become less challenging as we learn more about this deadly process. 



# Deleted 

* We don’t know when metastasis occurs – early or late during cancer development
* Cancer cell plasticity 
    * Limiting the plasticity of metastatic cells could be an option to make them less resistant to therapy 
    * However, knowledge of the molecular mediators of this plasticity is rather limited (source) 
* **1. Our current understanding of metastasis is incomplete **
* Historically, metastasis has been studied more recently than the initial stages of tumorigenesis, so there is less known about it than other processes involved in cancer development. The study of metastasis, like other cancer stages, is complicated by the fact that it is a highly complex, multi-staged process. Metastasis is a complex, multi-staged process across different cellular environments. … 
* In addition to their rapid rate of evolution, metastases also have high phenotypic plasticity. Phenotypic plasticity refers to the ability of cells to change their phenotypes without changing their genotypes. Metastasis selects for cells that are highly plastic due to the diverse challenges they have to go through before they can successfully propagate to a secondary site, such as surviving mechanical forces in the blood and adapting to the foreign environment of the secondary site. Because of this plasticity, pathways or molecules that could be important for one cancer or at one stage of metastasis may not be important for another. 
* High plasticity 
    * Metastasis selects for cells that are highly adaptable, due to the diverse types of stresses they experience before they can successfully propagate to a secondary site 
        * Such cells are thus more resistant to therapy 
    * Because of this plasticity, pathways or molecules that might be important for one cancer or at one stage of cancer development may not be important for another context, which makes it difficult to identify which genes might be important for therapy 
        * E.g. 
    * However, similar to previously drug studies, 
        * E.g. MMP inhibitors, anti-angiogenic drugs
        * MMP flawed trial design – MMP inhibitor was only effective in preventing metastasis formation in nude mice when the inhibitor was given 4 days before tumour inoculation, but in clinical trials the inhibitor is given to patients with existing tumours and most likely already had metastasis occur 
* Clinical trials are difficult to implement 
    * Typically a patient has to be treated with known, previously approved drugs first before they can be treated with an experimental drug (to manage risk) 
        * E.g. adjuvant treatment 
        * Also identifying patients who would be responsive to the treatment can be challenging
            * E.g. adjuvant treatment for patients with bone metastasis is only effective for patients with post-menopausal breast cancer 
    * E.g. Past clinical trials of matrix metalloproteinases have not been successful; possible that they were tested too late in the disease. MMPs act in the initial stages of metastasis when the tumour penetrates the endothelial membrane, so MMP inhibitors have failed to inhibit cancer 
    * Clinical trials may also have to be done for years, as dormant micrometastases can remain dormant and have been known to relapse after 20 years. This can be very expensive 