**How have in silico (computational) approaches contributed to our understanding of pre-mRNA splicing and its regulation?** (AZ)

# Introduction and brief overview of splicing 
In eukaryotic cells, splicing relies on a series of consensus cis-elements on which spliceosome machineries assemble. As shown in Figure 1, they include the 5’ splice site (5’ss), 3’ splice site (3’ ss), branch point, and the polypyrimidine tract. In human, splicing is characterised by two steps — exon definition and exon juxtaposition. In the first step, the 5’ ss is defined via binding of the U1snRNP, which contains an snRNA complementary to the consensus 5’ss sequence. The 3’ss is bound by U2AF35, which interact with the polypyrimidine tract-binding U2AF65. As shown by Grabowski et al 1992, the U1 and U2 complexes are assembled across exons (hence exon definition, rather than intron definition). Then U1 and U2 undergo cross-intron interactions, resulting in removing of the intron. U1-U2 interactions requires a third partner, which can be SRSFs harbouring RS domains, e.g. SRSF1.

While some organisms, such as S. cerevisiae, have clearly defined splicing sites, in other higher eukaryotes like human, the consensus splicing sites are less well-defined. This means putative splice sites may appear by chance, generating pseudo-exons. In addition, animals possess tissue-specific alternative splicing programs, in which alternative splicing of hundreds of genes appeared to be co-regulated. It has puzzled biochemists how the cellular machinery coped with such information processing problem — i.e. identifying real exons, and achieving tissue-specific regulation.

In this essay, I will introduce how the use of bioinformatic analysis, especially **oligonucleotide sequences** (k-mers) enrichment analysis, has helped us to understand exon definition and tissue-specific alternative splicing in animals (more specifically humans).

# Systemic identification of splicing enhancers and silencers 

Through biochemical analysis, a number of positive and negative regulators of splicing were characterised. The best known examples include SR proteins (positive regulators, e.g. SRSF1, SRSF3) and hnRNPs (negative regulators). These regulators are often RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that binds are specific sequence motifs, identified through experiments like RBP SELEX and functional SELEX. The binding sites of such RBPs thus become enhancer or silencer of splicing.

Biochemical studies of splicing enhancers and silencers were relatively low throughput. Fairbrother et al published a seminal study in 2002, introducing RESCUE -ESE, a bioinformatic pipeline which enabled systematic discovery of exonic splicing enhancers (ESE). The program receives sequences of known exons and introns as inputs, and search for 6-mer sequences that (1) occur more often in exons than introns, and (2) are more enriched in weak exons (which needs more help to be incorporated into transcripts). They then clustered the identified k-mers into sequence motifs. The k-mer search returned some known ESE motifs, such as GAAGAA, which corresponds to SRSF1 binding sites. In addition, more previously uncharacterised RNA motifs were uncovered, opening doors for more targeted biochemical analysis.

# **Enhancer and Silencer Confers to Specificity of Splicing**

Following the paradigm set by Fairbrother et al., Zhang and Chasin et al (2004) used programs with similar logic to identify 8-mer ESE and exonic splicing silencers (ESS). Besides identifying 10 classes of ESE and 8 classes of ESS, they also examined the occurance of ESS and ESE in real exons compared to pseudo-exons. Importantly, they found the key features that distinguish a real exon from a pseudo-exon are high frequency of ESE and low frequency of ESS, which directly addressed the information deficit problem in splice site definition. Wang et al (2004) carried out 10-mer analysis of ESS; using a splicing simulation program named ExonScan, they found that enrichment of ESS is crucial for pseudoexon skipping. Interestingly, the ExonScan program was designed to predict splicing outcome using only information accessible to the spliceosome machinery (e.g. sequence motifs present, but not the degree of conservation). Richard Feyman once said “what I cannot recreate I do not understand”. Hence, such programs allow us to test our understanding on splicing, and provides a rapid way to assay splicing outcome (assuming the algorithm is accurate).

# **Identification of Co-regulated Tissue-Specific Alternative Splicing Map**

Alternative splicing is a key mechanism conferring to proteomic diversity that underpins cell type differentiation. Development of alternative-splicing-sensitive microarrays, and more recently RNA-seq, allowed us to profile splicing events globally. Then, correlation between specific splicing events and tissue of origin, and association with RNA motifs can be identified. For instance, Wang et al (2008) analysed transcriptomes of 15 human tissues, and identified over 22,000 tissue-specific splicing events, along with 6-mer motifs enriched in specific locations in these events (Figure 2).

Study at such scale would have been impossible without bioinformatics. They re-discovered some known motifs, such as UCUCUC and CUCUCU, which corresponds to binding sites of PTBP1 and PTBP2 — providing validation to the program. The program having an binding sites of PTBP1 and PTBP2 upstream of an exon was a strong predictor that this exon will be included in cerebellar cortex. Enrichment of UGCAUG, or FOX protein recognition sites, confers to location-dependent outcomes. When situated downstream of an exon, it predicts inclusion in heart and skeletal muscle, where FOX proteins are highly expressed (i.e. postive regulation). However, when found upstream, it was associated with exclusive in these tissues (i.e. negative regualtions). Intriguingly, this study identified alternative polyadenylation sites to be even more common this exon skipping/inclusion in tissue-specific transcriptomes. They found a motif, ACUAAC, to be highly abundant in brain-specific alternatively polyadenylated sites. This motif resembles a perfect match to the consensus binding sequence of a STAR family RBP named QKI, whose role in polyadenylation has been proposed but uncharacterised. Hence, the bioinformatics analysis once again helped us to abstract information and provided us with new research directions.

The neuron-specific of microexons is perhaps the best studied example of tissue-specific splicing program. Computational analysis found these microexons are often associated with short size and flanking PTBP1 binding sites — both of which were later biochemically verified to be necessary for the seen splicing pattern. More recently, Irimia et al (2014) has found strong correlation between disrupted micronexon splicing and autism spectrum disorder, by performing transcriptomic analysis on postmortem samples of autistic individuals. They found the severity of autism positively correlated with the degree of alteration in splicing program. In addition, autistic individual had significantly reduced nSR100 expression (a know positive regulator of microexon inclusion).

# Conclusion 
Splice site determination is essentially an information processing problem, in which cells receives input on RBP-RNA interactions and RBP abundance, and returns splice site determination outcome. This made bioinformatics a suitable method to study alternative splicing. By converting a biological problem (RNA-RBP binding) into a k-mer search problem, it allowed us to rapidly and systematically identify RNA-RNP interactions that have high influence on splice site definition. However, it still need to be combined with experimental validation to provide mechanistic insights into the biochemistry of splicing.