**The 3’UTR of mRNAs provides diverse opportunities for regulation of eukaryotic translation. Discuss, using experimental examples.**

## Introduction 

The 3’ untranslated region (3’ UTR) is important to mRNA translation due to the various ways it contributes to regulating protein expression. Its importance is such that more complex eukaryotes with more cells and larger genome sizes tend to have longer 3’ UTRs, suggesting that 3’ UTRs contribute to increased sophistication of regulatory systems. Moreover, while non-coding, 3’ UTRs also tend to contain many conserved regions, typically binding sites for RNA binding proteins (RBPs) or miRNAs. In this essay, the particular mechanisms by which 3’ UTRs regulate eukaryotic translation will be discussed, including how 3’ UTRs affect RNA localisation, mRNA half-life, and translational efficiency, as well as the importance of 3’ UTR length to translation regulation.  

## Translational efficiency 

The 3’ UTR affects the rate of translation of its ORF via binding of RBPs or miRNAs that interfere with the function of translation machinery. One way is for certain RBPs to form a repressive “closed loop” that displaces the PABP-eIF4G-eIF4E complex that is required for enhanced translation efficiency. Instead, other protein complexes can bridge the 5’ cap and 3’ UTR of the mRNA to prevent closed loop formation, thus repressing translation. For example, Minshall et al (2007) used co-immunoprecipitation and gel filtration assays to show that CPEB in the early Xenopus oocyte interacts with 4E-T, which binds to eIF4E, as well as eIF4E1b. As eIF4E1b can bind to the 5’ cap, while CPEB binds to cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements (CPEs) in the 3’ UTR, an alternative closed loop is formed that reduces translation rate. However, upon phosphorylation during oocyte maturation, CPEB dissociates from 4E-T to recruit polyadenylases and is also degraded, resulting in derepression of translation. This mechanism demonstrates that post-translational modifications of 3’ UTR RBPs can expand the range of functions of the 3’ UTR, which allow for changes in regulation over time. 

  

RBPs might also reduce translation efficiency by affecting polyadenylation. CPEB recognises internal cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements in the 3’ UTR, then recruits poly(A) polymerase GLD2, as well as CPSF, upon phosphorylation. Barkoff et al (2000) injected synthetic cyclic B1 mRNAs with modified 3’ UTRs into Xenopus oocytes to show that mutations in CPEs or the polyadenylation signal AAUAAA prevents polyadenylation and translation activation, without changing mRNA levels. In addition, the particular number and location of CPEs in the 3’ UTR can affect translation – if a CPE overlaps with the polyadenylation signal, CPEB binding will prevent CPSF from accessing the mRNA until it is degraded after phosphorylation **(i.e. after the RNA matures)**, allowing for temporal regulation of translation via the 3’ UTR. 

  

miRNAs are similarly able to inhibit repress translation by inhibiting translation initiation. They function by binding to regions of imperfect complementarity in the 3’ UTR of their target mRNA. Humphreys et al (2005) showed that when the 5’ cap of a luciferase reporter mRNA was replaced with a viral internal ribosome entry site, the efficiency of CXCR4 miRNA repression was reduced, as the reporter had higher expression than another reporter with a 5’ cap. Moreover, presence of both the poly(A) tail and the 5’ cap resulted in greater repression than either component alone. This suggests that miRNA repression may act by interfering with the 5’ cap and tail interactions, and the authors speculated that miRNAs may interact with 4E-T as well. If this is the case, it would show an interesting similarity to CPEB function. 

  

## mRNA half-life

The 3’ UTR can also affect translation by affecting mRNA half-life, in turn affecting the number of mRNA molecules available in the cell for translation. Firstly, the 3’ UTR affects polyadenylation as explained earlier, and poly(A) tail length can directly affect mRNA half-life. In addition, 3’ UTRs contain RBP binding sites that affect recruitment of mRNA degradation factors. For example, some mRNAs involved in regulating iron levels contain iron response element (IRE) hairpins in the 3’ UTR, which recruits iron regulatory protein (IRP) 1 and 2. This includes the transferrin receptor, which mediates iron transport into the cell under low iron conditions. When iron levels are high, IRP1 is functional as an aconitase due to the presence of iron-sulfur clusters. However, when iron levels are low, IRP1 functions as an IRE binding protein due to the low levels of iron-sulfur clusters. In transferrin, since the IREs are located in the 3’ UTR, IRPs bind to the 3’ UTR under low iron conditions, which increases its half-life by protecting the mRNA from endonucleolytic cleavage and degradation.

  

Another common RBP binding site that can affect mRNA half-life is AU-rich elements (AREs), which are enriched in 3’ UTRs of genes that have to be tightly regulated and thus have short half-lives (less than 30 min), such as cytokines and proto-oncogenes. Largely, they are negative regulators of mRNA stability – Shaw and Kamen (1986) created a β-globin gene construct with an ARE in the 3’ UTR, which reduced its half-life compared to mRNA without ARE, as shown by a time-course PAGE. This effect is mediated by ARE-binding proteins, such as tristetraprolin (TTP), which recruits decay factors directly to ARE-containing mRNAs. Lykke-Anderson & Wagner (2005) demonstrated this by tethering TTP directly to the 3’ UTR via MS2 binding sites, which resulted in increased rate of decay as shown by time course Northern blot. In addition, they also showed via co-immunoprecipitation that TTP does this by recruiting decay factors, specifically the decapping enzyme Dcp2, directly to ARE-containing mRNAs. In other words, AREs recruit degradation machinery via a mediator RBP to regulate mRNA half-life. One exception among ARE binding proteins HuR, as it can stabilise mRNA instead of reducing half-life. 

  

## mRNA localization 

The 3’ UTR influences localisation of the mRNA, which regulates translation through space, i.e. where the mRNA is translated. For example, the β-actin has a bipartite motif in the 3’ UTR which acts as a “zip code” which is recognised by ZBP1 for localisation in fibroblasts. These signals might form secondary structures which are then recognised by RBPs, as seen in the interaction between bicoid and Staufen, required for bicoid mRNA transport. The mechanism for localization differs between mRNAs, but one notable example is peripherin mRNA. Chang et al (2006) used fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) of peripherin mRNA with and without 3’ UTR, and showed that clustering of peripherin mRNA depends on the presence of 3’ UTR. This clustering may be achieved via RBPs that interact with different peripherin 3’ UTRs to bring the mRNAs into proximity with each other, thus allowing for homopolymerisation of peripherin into intermediate filaments. 

Alternatively, instead of mediating transport of the mRNA, the 3’ UTR might mediate transport of the nascent polypeptide instead. For example, Chartron et al (2016) discovered that the signal recognition particle (SRP) is “pre-loaded” onto ribosome-nascent chain complexes even before the signal sequence is translated. By performing co-immunoprecipitation against SRP72 followed by ribosome profiling, they found that the 3’ UTRs of membrane protein-encoding genes can recruit SRP. This mechanism might explain how SRP targets proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum with high specificity despite the low complexity of the signal sequence, as the 3’ UTR provides an additional recognition mechanism for SRP without affecting the protein sequence. 

3’ UTR-mediated localisation also affects translation through time, since different locations in the cell have different RBPs and ribosome concentrations that can affect translation efficiency. For example, Huttelmaier et al (2005) quantified β-actin translation and found that as ZBP1 concentration increased, β-actin translation decreased, but if the 3’ UTR zipcode sequence was removed, there was no dependence on ZBP1. In addition, when ZBP1 was phosphorylated by a mutant constitutively active Src kinase, it shows reduced binding to the zipcode. FRET analysis was then used to show that ZBP1 and Src interact at neuronal outgrowths. This data suggests a model where β-actin mRNA is repressed by binding of ZBP1 at the 3’ UTR during transport, but at the synapse, ZBP1 is phosphorylated by Src kinase, releasing it from the 3’ UTR and allowing β-actin to be translated. As such, the diversity of 3’ UTR regulation might also be because of the diversity in the local assemblies of proteins that can interact with it. 

  

More recently, RNAs and proteins have been found to undergo liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS), forming ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules that are mediated by non-specific but extensive interactions between molecules. 3’ UTRs may be involved in granule formation, with length being an important factor. Han et al (2012) used deep sequencing to find that cellular RNA granules tend to have extended  3’ UTRs that are on average 5-fold longer than non-granule mRNAs, as well as binding sites for known granule-associated proteins (e.g. Pum1), which have intrinsically disordered regions that allow for the formation of messenger ribonucleoproteins. Phase separation of RNAs may thus provide an additional method of translational regulation, since the localisation of proteins into RNP granules is controlled and this would change the complement of RBPs that the RNA can interact with.   

  

## Conclusion

Overall, 3’ UTRs are able to mediate translation regulation via a multitude of mechanisms. Why is a single region in the mRNA able to provide such diverse opportunities for translation regulation? One reason could be that it is able to interact with a diverse set of proteins. As seen from the examples above, 3’ UTRs can contain multiple binding sites for different RBPs and miRNAs that each activate or repress translation and by different mechanisms. Moreover, the cellular state can determine which RBPs are able to access the 3’ UTR at any given moment – cell type, stage of development, and the local microenvironment can all affect the set of interactions afforded to the 3’ UTR. Additionally, mRNAs may be transcribed with alternative 3’ UTRs that change the accessibility to 3’ UTR cis elements. While this was not explored in detail, 3’ UTR length can affect the formation of secondary structures as well as the presence/absence of regulatory elements, which also increases diversity of regulatory mechanisms. This is not unlike how alternative splicing in the ORF increases the diversity of protein isoforms. 

Discussion of how 3’ UTR regulates translation would also not be possible without the numerous experimental studies performed on mRNAs, from reporter assays to co-immunoprecipitation to transcriptomics methods. In the future, the increased use of global profiling methods such as comprehensive identification of RNA-binding proteins by mass spectrometry (ChIRP-MS) or RNA antisense purification coupled with mass spectrometry (RAP-MS) would be useful in uncovering the full spectrum of protein interactions and thus regulatory mechanisms that the 3’ UTRs mediate, particularly under different cellular conditions.  

## 3’ UTR length 

- Interactions between elements in 3’ UTRs 
- E.g. (72) – most smaller 3’ UTRs resulted in upregulation of protein expression, while longer UTRs were repressive 
- Kristjansdottir et al (2015) generated luciferase constructs of different fragments of the Hmga2 3’UTR to test for their effect on translation activity. They found that while AREs within the 3’ UTR upregulated expression, within the full length sequence, they repressed expression, which they attributed to a change in the RBP that interacts with the AREs as a result of localization by terminal 3’ UTR elements that change what RBPs the AREs can interact with 
- Alternative 3’ UTR generation regulates interactions with RNA binding proteins 
- Change accessibility to 3’ UTR cis elements by generating shorter 3’ UTRs that form less secondary structure 
- E.g. Wissink et al (2016) – when 3’ UTR elements tested as 8-mers were inserted into a 500 nt sequence in 3’ UTR of luciferase reporter constructs, their effects on translation changed, possibly due to new local secondary structure that changes accessibility to 3’ UTR elements 
- Change which regulatory elements are present in the 3’ UTR 
- E.g. embryonic tissues tend to express shorter 3’ UTRs than differentiated tissues, and in differentiated tissues, each have different alternative 3’ UTRs